CHAPTER XXIII
It was eight o'clock when we landed. We walked for a short time on the shore, enjoying the
transitory light, and then retired to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters,
woods and mountains, obscured in darkness yet still displaying their black outlines.
The wind, which had followed in the south, now rose with great violence in the west.
The moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was beginning to descend. The clouds swept
across it swifter than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected
the scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves that were beginning
to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended. I had been calm during the day,
but so soon as night obscured the shapes of objects, a thousand fears rose in my mind.
I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped the pistol which was hidden in my bosom.
Every sound terrified me, but I resolved that I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from
the conflict until my own life or that of my adversary was extinguished.
Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence,
but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her and trembling,
she asked. What is it that agitates you, my dear Victor? What is it you fear?
Oh, peace, peace, my love, I replied. This night and all will be safe,
but this night is dreadful, very dreadful. I passed an hour in this state of mind when
suddenly I reflected how fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to my wife,
and earnestly I entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had
obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.
She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the passages of the
house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to my adversary,
but I discovered no trace of him and was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate
chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his menaces, when suddenly I heard a shrill and
fearful scream. It came from the room into which Elizabeth had retired. As I heard it,
the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fiber
was suspended. I could feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of
my limbs. The state lasted but for an instant. The scream was repeated, and I rushed into the room.
Great God, why did I not then expire? Why am I here to relate the destruction of the best hope
and the purest creatures of earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed,
her head hanging down and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair.
Everywhere I turn I see the same figure, her bloodless arms in relaxed form, flung by the
murderer on its bridled rear. Could I behold this and live? Alas, life is obstinate and clings
closest where it is most hated. For a moment only did I lose recollection. I fell senseless on the
ground. When I recovered I found myself surrounded by the people of the inn, their countenance
expressed a breathless terror. But the horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow
of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where lay the body of Elizabeth,
my love, my wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the posture in
which I had first beheld her, and now as she lay, her head upon her arms and a handkerchief
thrown across her face and neck, I might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards her and
embraced her with ardor, but the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what I
now held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth whom I had loved and cherished. Their murderous
mark of the fiend's grasp was on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue from her lips.
While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to look up. The windows
of the room had before been darkened, and I felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light
of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation of
horror not to be described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred.
A grin was on the face of the monster. He seemed to jeer as with his fiendish finger
he pointed towards the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards the window and, drawing pistol
from my bosom, fired, but he eluded me, leapt from his station and running with the swiftness of
plunged into the lake. The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I pointed to the
spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with boats. Nets were cast but in vain.
After passing several hours, we returned. Hopeless, most of my companions believing
it to have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search
the country, parties going in different directions among the woods and vines. I attempted to accompany
them and proceed the short distance from the house, but my head whirled round. My steps were
like those of a drunken man, and I felt at last in a state of utter exhaustion. A film covered my
eyes and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state, I was carried back and placed
on a bed, hardly conscious of what had happened. My eyes wandered round the room as if to seek
something that I had lost. After an interval, I rose and, as if by instinct, crawled into the
my beloved lay. There were women weeping around. I hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs.
All this time, no distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to their
various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their cause. I was bewildered
in a cloud of wonder and horror. The death of William, the execution of Justine, the murder
of Clairvaux, and lastly of my wife. Even at that moment, I knew not that my only remaining friends
were safe from the malignity of the fiend. My father, even now, might be writhing under his
grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This idea made me shudder and recalled me to
action. I started up and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.
There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the lake, but the wind was unfavorable
and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to
arrive by night. I hired men to row and took my oar myself, where I had always experienced relief
from mental torment and bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt and the excess of
agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down the oar, and leaning
my head upon my hands gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes
which were familiar to me in my happier time, and which I had contemplated but the day before in
the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes. The
rain had ceased for a moment, and I saw the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours
before. They had then been observed by Elizabeth. Nothing is so painful to the human mind as a great
and sudden change. The sun might shine or the crowds might lure, but nothing could appear to
me as it had done the day before. A fiend had snatched from me every hope of future happiness.
No creature had ever been so miserable as I was. So frightful an event is single in the history of
man. But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event?
Mine has been a tale of horrors. I have reached their acme, and what I must now relate can be
tedious to you. Know that one by one my friends were snatched away. I was left desolate. My own
strength is exhausted, and I must tell in a few words what remains of my hideous narration.
I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived, but the former sunk under the tidings
I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable old man, his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they
had lost their charm and their delight. He is Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he
doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life, having few
affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. Cursed be the fiend that brought
misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste and wretchedness. He could not live under the
horrors that were accumulated around him. The springs of existence suddenly gave way. He was
unable to rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms. What then became of me? I
know not. I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed
upon me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant
bales with the friends of my youth, but I awoke and found myself in a dungeon. Melancholy followed,
but by degrees I gained a clear conception of my miseries and situation, and was then
released from my prison, for they had called me mad, and during many months, as I understood,
a solitary cell had been my habitation. Liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had I
not, as I awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. As the memory of my past
pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their cause, the monster whom I had created, the
miserable demon whom I had sent abroad into the world for my destruction. I was possessed
by a maddening rage when I thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might
have him within my grasp to wreak a great and single revenge on his cursed head.
Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes. I began to reflect on the best means
of securing him, and for this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal
and told him that I had an accusation to make, that I knew the destroyer of my family, and that
I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer.
The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. Be assured, sir, he said. No pains or
exertion on my part shall be spared to discover the villain.
Thank you, I replied. Listen therefore to the deposition that I have to make. It is indeed a
tale so strange that I should fear you would not credit it were it not something in truth which,
however wonderful, forces conviction. The story is too connected to be mistaken for a dream,
and I have no motive for falsehood. My manner, as I thus addressed him,
was impressive but calm. I had formed in my own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death,
and this purpose quieted my agony, and for an interval reconciled me to life.
I now relate my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates
with accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.
The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous,
but as I continued he became more attentive and interested.
I saw him sometimes shudder with horror, and others a lively surprise,
unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance.
When I had concluded my narration, I said, This is the being whom I accuse,
and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your whole power.
It is your duty as magistrate, and I believe and hope that your feelings as a man will not
revolt from the execution of those functions on this occasion.
The address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own auditor.
He had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given to a tale of spirits
and supernatural events, but when he was called upon to act officially in consequence,
the whole tide of his incredulity returned.
He, however, answered mildly, I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit,
but the creature of whom you speak appears to have powers which would put all my exertions
to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice,
and inhabit caves and dens where no man would venture to intrude?
Besides, some months have elapsed since the commission of his crimes,
and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered or what region he may now inhabit.
I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit, and if he has indeed taken
refuge in the Alps he may be hunted like the Chamois and destroyed as a beast of prey,
but I perceive your thoughts. You do not credit my narrative,
and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the punishment which is his desert.
As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes. The magistrate was intimidated.
You are mistaken, said he. I will exert myself,
and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer punishment
proportionate to his crimes, but I fear from what you have yourself described to be his properties
that this will prove impracticable, and thus while every proper measure is pursued,
you should make up your mind to disappointment. That cannot be, but all that I can say will be
of little avail. My revenge is of no moment to you, yet while I allow it to be a vice,
I confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. My rage is unspeakable.
When I reflect that the murderer whom I have turned loose upon society still exists,
you refuse my just demand. I have but one resource, and I devote myself,
either in my life or death, to his destruction.
I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this. There was a frenzy in my manner,
and something, I doubt not, of that haughty fierceness which the martyrs of old are said
to have possessed. But to a German magistrate whose mind was occupied by far other ideas
than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of mine had much the appearance of madness.
He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse, as a child, and reverted to my tale as the effects
of delirium. Man, I cried, how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease! You know
not what it is you say. I broke from the house angry and disturbed, and retired to meditate.
I broke from the house angry and disturbed, and retired to meditate on some other mode of action.